# data wrangling Genetics

## Describtion
In this project, we have the types of tumors as labels and gene data with the name of each RNA sequence. The main porpose is to predict labels for new genes by applying the model we built with existing dataset. 

There are four parts in total, the first part is to reduce dimension of data in three methods respectively, the methods are principle component analysis (PCA), t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP). 

After we get the three datasets generated by three dimension reduction methods, we can move to the second part, which is overall data analysis based on quantitative measures and data visualization. In this part, we observe the data features through mean and variance values combined with density plot. Also, we use ggplot to visualize the dimensionality-reduced data by clustering based on labels. The features of data we observed before will be shown by clustering performance. 

On the basis of our understanding of the three dimension reduced datasets through generally analyzing and comparing, we model the datasets respectively by applying the random forest function. After optimizing the models by adjusting the model parameters, we compare the accuracy of these three model. The dimensionality reduction method corresponding to the model with the highest accuracy is what we will use for future label prediction of new genes.

In the last part, we do interactive visualization 
On the basis of our understanding of the three dimension reduced datasets through generally analyzing and comparing, we model the datasets respectively by applying the random forest function. After optimizing the models by adjusting the model parameters, we compare the accuracy of these three model. The dimensionality reduction method corresponding to the model with the highest accuracy is what we will use for future label prediction of new genes.

## Prerequisites
R

R.Studio

Package "LutzzLu/data_wrangling/lutzqbsdatawrangling"

## Installation
devtools::install_github("LutzzLu/data_wrangling/lutzqbsdatawrangling")

library(lutzqbsdatawrangling)

## Contact
Yunrui.Lu.GR@Dartmouth.edu

Jiahui.Li.GR@Dartmouth.edu

Michael.Z.Meng.GR@Dartmouth.edu

Matthew.M.Chan.GR@Dartmouth.edu
